


1. You have a file with permissions -rw-r--r--, and you run chmod +x file.sh. What happens?

Will add the execute permissions for all like owner , group,others ,new permissions will be -rwxr-xr-x



2. What is the difference between chmod 744 file.txt and chmod u=rwx,go=r file.txt

No difference in effect. Both commands set the same permissions:
 -rwxr--r– ie for owner all permissions rwx , for others and group, it is r--



3. What is the sticky bit, and when should you use it?

The sticky bit (+t) is used on directories to restrict deletion.
Only the file owner (or root) can delete their files, even if others have write permission.



4. You are told to give the owner full access, group only execute, and others no permissions. What symbolic command achieves this?

chmod u=rwx,g=x,o= file.txt
chmod 710 file.txt



5. What is umask, and why is it important?

It is used to set default permissions to a file or folder


6. If the umask is 022, what are the default permissions for a new file and a new directory?

The default permissions for file is 644 => rw-r-r-
The default permissions for folder is 644 => rwx-r-x-r-x

7. Why is umask often set to 002 in development environments but 027 or 077 in production?

In development All users in the same group can edit files.
Useful in teams where multiple developers need write access.
secure Production
640 for files, 750 for directories
Only the owner and group have access; others cannot read.
Preventing unauthorized reads from other system users.
Highly Secure Production
Resulting file permissions: 600 for files, 700 for directories
Only the file owner can read/write/access — no one else.Handling secrets, SSH keys, config files, etc.

8. useradd vs adduser

useradd — Low-Level, Manual ,It's a built-in system command (part of passwd package),Requires manual flags for setting things like home directory, shell, etc.
Does not create the home directory by default unless you specify -m.
commonly used in scripts or automation.

adduser — High-Level, Friendlyit's a Perl script that wraps around useradd.Interactive: asks for password, full name, room number, etc.
Automatically handles more setup: home dir, permissions, groups.

